Question 5.5.5. Question 5. Exam Style Questions.
A function is defined by g(x) equals 3 - 12 over x plus 3
for negative 9 less than or equal to x less than or equal to
9.\ x not equal to negative 3. This question is worth 5 marks.
Find the range of g. [3 marks]
This function has a vertical asymptote at x equals negative
3 and horizontal asymptote y equals 3. Analyse each piece.
Left piece [-9. negative 3): g(-9) equals 3 - 12
over negative 6 equals 3 plus 2 equals 5. As
x maps to negative 3^-. g maps to plus infinity.
So on the left: y greater than or equal to 5.
Right piece (-3. 9]: As x maps to negative 3^ plus . g maps to
-infinity. g(9) equals 3 - 12 over 12 equals 3 - 1 equals 2.
So on the right: y less than or equal to 2.
Range: y less than or equal to 2 or y greater than or equal to 5
Find the value of g inverse(0). [2 marks]
Set g(x) equals 0 and solve.
3 - 12 over x plus 3 equals 0
12 over x plus 3 equals 3
x plus 3 equals 4
x equals 1
g inverse(0) equals 1
IB exam tip: Rational functions with restricted domains: always
check both pieces (left and right of the asymptote).